The tape reporter is running, and we're talking to Professor Harold Bloom this morning on the 3rd of August.
You have so many books coming out, I have to say, in here.
I love this new book, The Best Poems of the English Language, and I've been very fortunate to get an advanced copy of Where Shall Wisdom Be Found.
Harold, where is all this energy coming from in all these different areas?
Dear Nick, I hardly...
recognize myself when you speak of energy.
I have recently had a 74th birthday, and I do have to go to the gym every day at doctor's orders, and I come back so worn out that I am indeed now an old man, Nick.
Energy.
You know, I sometimes think, Nick,
Though I don't want to thank them for it, but that what still keeps me going, you know, I'm going to go on teaching at Yale as long as I'm physically and mentally capable of it.
Though I've termed NYU, and I will, of course, go on writing books as long as I have a mind fit for doing it.
But I sometimes wonder...
if what spurs me on is a kind of need for vindication, because though I never meant to be in any way belligerent, such has been the state of both, you might want to call it our university culture and our media culture,
Each has degenerated so much that in crying out against this and crying out for cognitive and aesthetic standards and rejecting the garbage and the middle-browism and the whole thing, one has become a target.
And I suppose one should expect that and one should accept it.
but I certainly seem to have something about the way I write or the way I am, which, you might say, infuriates the opposition.
I'm not sure I can tell you what that is.
Perhaps you can tell me, my dear.
But not only are you writing many books, but...
They're all so stimulating, I have to say.
I was going from one to the other last night.
I had a pile of... Well, I guess, but I find something stimulating everywhere I turn.
I'd like to start.
I was so taken when I read a while back that you were placing your books, your library, at St.
Michael's College in Vermont.
when they're not, except for a certain number.
I mean, first of all, the addition to the library that they're building is pretty good, kind enough to call it.
A reading room is not yet fully funded, and it's not known when construction will begin.
And, you know, the core of my library, which I need to continue to work with, they will not receive until I am...
No longer able to use it, shall we say.
What is called, in the great perhaps.
But I chose St.
Michael College for my, not only for my library, but for my archives.
All the letters I've kept of remarkable writers whom I've had correspondence.
My notebooks, my... What am I saying?
My... My published manuscript.
In many cases, I haven't chosen to publish them.
It's a massive archive.
Do you annotate your books?
I have in recent years, after years of treating them as though they were library books, I think I was partly converted by reading that splendid book by, is it a Mrs. Jackson, Unmemorabilia, which I reviewed.
And I just served as a reader for Yale Press for the follow-up volume, which is pretty much unromantic memorabilia.
I now...
For instance, I am writing a book that no doubt will make me reviled by an entire new set of antagonists.
I am writing a book called The Names Divine, four colon, Jesus and Yahweh.
And the essential argument is that...
Well, first of all, of course, and it's too obvious, it should be worth more than remarking that Yeshua of Nazareth, the historical figure about whom we know virtually nothing, has very little relation whatsoever to the Jesus Christ of the Gospels, let alone of Trinitarian and subsequent theology.
But that is the major aspect of the book, the major argument of the book, is the demonstration that Jesus the Christ, God the Father, the Holy Spirit, all these are gods of one kind, and Yahweh, the, as it were, original god of this tradition,
Actually, I think if he survives today, except among that small remnant of my, I cannot say my co-religionist, because though I certainly identify myself with everything Jewish, and it's with me, I, um, I do not trust in the covenant, and for good reason.
Um, and by some medical definition, that, uh, means I'm not a co-religionist in anyone.
Um,
The essential point is that Yahweh, and this last could also be almost in passing, but it's sure to make people furious that if you want a sign of him being abroad in the world, it is as the Allah of the Koran and everything that has followed since.
That has far more in common with the Yahweh of Tanakh, of the Hebrew Bible, than the Christian God and the Father does that learn Jesus the Christ.
But I find that writing this, I've had to acquire an almost entire new library of books, which I've been absorbing and annotating very freely indeed.
Do you feel that you can know an author, an author that you're particularly fond of, or who moves you profoundly by knowing the books that they read?
Do you try to know...
Yes.
I mean, would you like to have Shakespeare's reading list, for instance?
Yes, yes.
I mean, scholars have sort of worked out what it probably was, and one can surmise that in the end it was fairly restricted.
He had never read Homer except in Chapman's version.
He had certainly read often in the original, as well as in Golding's
version.
Virgil, I think, does not mean that much to him.
Chaucer, the Geneva Bible, which is essentially, in the end, William Tyndale.
His precursors are William Tyndale and Geoffrey Chaucer, clearly.
They are the writers who most deeply influence him and to whom he is indebted.
Marlow, of course, is a
dangerous stimulant and starting point whom he transcends.
I'm not sure that much else matters.
I mean, in general.
In general, the general principle, yes.
It's the kind of critical approach that I have partly inherited and partly, I think, transformed.
I would insist that it's absolutely vital...
I mean, you tell us in any number of your books how to read and why, where shall wisdom be around, and I'm wondering, I think we're approaching at least 30 books now, right?
I believe that would be, since that huge anthology is really a book by me, it's got...
750 pages of poetry and 250 pages of commentary quite frequently on poems that there was no room to include.
And I think that Harper's is actually going to bring out the commentary.
It's going to bring out just the introduction as a separate little volume, not the intensive commentaries.
But I think that the, when this, I hope, a year from this October, when this, um,
Jesus and Yahweh book is published.
That will actually be the 30th by actual count.
That'll be very exciting.
I wonder, a scholar intent on hindering the reading, you used the phrase deep reading.
If we really want to know the depth of your reading, will it be essential to go to St.
Michael College and to go through those 25,000 volumes whenever they get there or however many get there?
Well, I suppose...
That would be part of it, but of course I have relied.
Yale University has, you know, one of the four great libraries in the United States, and therefore in the world.
Harvard, Yale, the Library of Congress, the 42nd Street Library, are the four great libraries in the United States.
I have had the library as a resource for ever since I got here as a graduate student.
Good heavens, that's 54 years ago.
Amazing.
The autumn of 1950.
Do you read principally, I mean, do you read in other languages or is it largely when you're reading physical works in other languages?
I read, well, where it is a work of imaginative fiction
poetry um you know. If it really does qualify as what we want to call literature rather than as commentary whether inspired or not, um yes if I know the original, I take pains to read it and reread it in the original. So proof you'll do in French. I invariably will read in French. I however unfortunately
They are lacunae, and I am too old now to remedy them.
I wish very much.
And when I was younger, I had learned to read Russian.
It's particularly ironic because my father was born and raised in Odessa, but he spoke Yiddish around the house, and he wanted to forget the Russian language, because he did not like the Russian.
And as I recall, you indicated that you taught yourself to read English by the age of five.
Yes, I heard no spoken English.
I mean, I was in the streets directly around our apartment, but they all spoke Yiddish out in the street.
This was way over on the old east side of the Bronx in the early 1930s.
So the language of the street was Yiddish, and the language at home was Yiddish.
I taught myself to read English before I could speak it.
The result is, as my friend and a poet critic John Hollander,
is always telling me with disapproval I mispronounce everything.
I've invented my own pronunciation.
George Bernard Shaw, long ago in his losing fight to change English spelling, pointed out that the way English is spelled and the way it is pronounced is amazingly dissimilar.
He...
You mentioned, on any number of different occasions, how Samuel Johnson, I guess, and Hazlitt are your two heroes as readers.
Tell me a little bit.
In English, Samuel Johnson, William Hazlitt.
I have a great love for Walter Pader, but he...
He deliberately kept his range narrower than they did.
Johnson, it is fair to say, had read everything, and not just for the coirmation of literature now, but anything that an educated mind could read that was available up to the time of his death.
I mean, to find that kind of
paragon of learning in literary critic again is just impossible.
Hazlitt, um, equally true, um, though once you got beyond, uh, what you might want to call high literature and, um, actually philosophy in his case, um, which he read copiously as Johnson did, um, and of course, uh, all questions about history were a great interest to Hazlitt also, uh,
But the range and scope are a little less wide than Johnson, so, of course, much more was available.
There have been other learned critics in the English and American traditions, but, you know, let's say, well, really literary critics or writers, um...
But they're not of the eminence, critically speaking, or in terms of general literary accomplishment of Samuel Johnson and William Hazlitt.
So I suppose, yes, I would have to say...
They remain forever impossible ideas.
Ruskin would be a third, I think.
What dazzles you most about these readers, the depth of their reading or their ability to... I think it's Boswell.
It may be someone else, but it may have been Boswell, who described what it was like being with Johnson when he suddenly received a new book in the mail.
or he had picked it up at a bookstore, but it had been given to him.
And there's actually a wonderful painting of him doing that, one of Reynolds' many portraits of him, in which you can see indeed that he is, you know, devouring it, and yet at the same time discarding what he doesn't want.
I don't know if he would tear his heart out.
He had extraordinary energy and ferocity, indeed, as a reader.
I cannot say that I read in quite that way anymore.
I used to be like that.
Indeed, I had freakish built-in mechanical aids when I was young, all through my young manhood, on through...
Most of middle age and early old age.
Now at 74, my once absolutely insane reading rate has slowed down unless I deliberately rev it up.
And my once, even to me, incredible ability to hold on word for word where
it had impressed me enough and wanted it to, even if it were prose.
That isn't quite what it was.
So still, if I, you know, find a really good poem that I've never seen before, it will memorize itself.
I will present it.
You're anticipating my question.
I was allowed to ask, do you mindfully commit these pieces to memory, or is it just part of the apparatus you have?
Even though I attempt...
to teach my students to do that.
I work at persuading them to try it.
I think they find it very peculiar at first.
I make clear it's not that I want them to learn anything by rote.
I simply say, look, take Tennyson's Ulysses, which are just as an instance.
It's sort of my favorite.
I said, you know, or take indeed something rather more substantial, powerful as Tennyson's Ulysses is.
Take, uh,
take indeed uh walk with minutes as i ever put the ocean of life and let it find you as coleridge would say read it out loud whether to yourself or others mostly to yourself indoors or outdoors until you find uh
That in a profound way, you do possess it by memory.
Now, you have Coleridge's.
You personally go to Yale at the Beinecke, I believe.
They have his books with all of his marginal adaptations in there.
Have you ever had a chance to go over?
Well, you know, it's some years now since I've spent any time in the Beinecke.
But in the past, I've gone through a great deal of what they have.
That's a fabulous archive, I would think.
In fact, they're publishing those that marginally, I think, of its own right.
His observations on these books is quite remarkable.
There have been previous collections, though, though I think they're a bit partial.
Tell me a bit, before we go off in other directions, but you are addressing yourself to wisdom literature.
I think...
Uh, you had the kindness to already have read that book called Her Show Wisdom.
Yes.
Um, very few people have, of course, as yet.
Um, I had a copy sent to the critic in my generation I continue to admire most, Angus Fletcher, who was a lifelong friend since we first met in, uh, the autumn of, uh, 54 at the Yale Hall of Graduate Studies.
Um,
When I first, no, no, the fall of 51, actually.
That's when I got here as a graduate student, the fall of 51, and met Angus almost immediately.
I asked to send it to Angus, and then not with a view to endorsements.
I am beyond that.
I don't say that out of pride, but because obviously enough, what can anybody say at this point?
another slab at the old meatloaf.
But he very kindly phoned me after he'd read it thoughtfully, and he's a considerable reader.
And he said, you know, Harold, it makes me understand, he said, I think I've read everything you've published, he said, and some things you haven't published, he said, and he said, it makes me understand the rest of you much better, and I feel that in a sense,
It just makes explicit what's always been implicit in you.
This is what you're looking for.
We had discussed earlier that you talk about one of the great paradoxes or certainly ironies involving yourself is that because of this remarkable dedication that you have to reading, you actually became physically ill from... I think I lived my life in many ways in the wrong way.
I think that, uh, no, I wouldn't say it was the devotion to, uh, to reading.
Having led so inactive a life, let me put it that way.
Um, I was really, uh, as I came up, uh, it will be years, this coming, um,
September, since my total collapse.
Uh, I'm in much better condition now, though still not in great condition.
My health is much better than I thought last year than I couldn't, of course, the year before.
Um, you know, I can't blame that on reading.
I can only blame that on me.
Um,
But I guess what I'm driving at is the therapeutic, I hate to use that word, but the therapeutic power of the reading.
And I would imagine what you have described is this wisdom literature to help you restore yourself.
Well, it never left one.
I kept myself going at the worst of times in the hospital.
And I was there for a long time by just reciting poems to myself.
And since I was in a private room, usually I recited him out loud to myself and thought about him.
But, no, I wouldn't want... I mean, the importance of exercise I now absolutely know.
And...
Since my personal trainer is leaving, I will no longer go to the downtown gym here.
Instead, this Saturday, we are purchasing a treadmill, which will be installed upstairs here in my house and all the other equipment.
From now on, I will do all my prescribed exercises here for up to an hour and a half a day.
Had I been doing that all my life, these things would not have happened to me.
But that had nothing to do with reading one.
One could still have read everything one had read and been rational about it.
I had asked you once if there's any book that felt you should have read that you haven't.
And you were amused by the suggestion.
And I have to say, you're the only intellect of consequence I have ever met.
who has actually suggested that he's ready.
Has he put it to you?
Isn't that wonderful?
The literal translation goes, the flesh is sad, alas, and I have read all the books.
No, I can't think of anything.
I can think of all the things I want to reread, and I hope there is time in whatever remaining years I have.
I don't have to reread Shakespeare because I teach him...
all year long, every year, and I don't have to reread all the poetry I care most for because I teach it all year long, every year.
You've also written that universities really don't teach reading for pleasure anymore, and I know this is something.
Nick, it is very hard to say
I mean, there are honorable exceptions.
There are real teachers still at many universities.
But as you know, the universities of the English-speaking world, universities and AP colleges of the English-speaking world, are in a deep sense willing victims of that whole phenomenon that if you stand back from far enough,
was beginning in the late 60s and early 70s, and, uh, it's still called by the archaic and inaccurate term, the counterculture, since the fact it has become a culture.
The culture of the New York Times is what was the counterculture in the late 60s, and this is not a good thing, not a good thing at all.
Um, but there's nothing to be done about it.
Um,
The parameters of the university are the parameters of the what might be called the elite construction of society.
And I make clear that I'm saying this as a liberal Democrat who regards the Republican Party as the enemies of the human race.
And I'm from Massachusetts, so you can be sure I share the sentiment.
Yes, but by the way, Nick, I have very little hope.
Oh, don't say that.
Well, I think the Democrats made a... I think Kerry took very bad advice on the convention when they said, you know, we have to be gentler and kinder.
That's ridiculous.
And not have direct personal attacks.
on President Bush.
That was an incredible mistake.
The result is that there has been no bump in the polls, and indeed some polls now show that since the convention, Kerry is down a point or two.
I was reading the Washington Post poll.
It's a little more hopeful.
Incredible, stupid mistake.
And the one quotable line that he had,
And that whole speech is where he actually went on the attack a little bit, talked about we won't have a vice president who will meet secretly with polluters, and we won't have an attorney general who doesn't respect the trust.
Yeah, but it was practically a throwaway.
What the speech should have been about was tracing the entire intersection of the House of Bush and the House of Sald,
It should have devoted a considerable time to the sense in which the war against Iraq is Halliburton's war.
They should have showed the Michael Moore movie is what they should have done.
I don't know if you've had a chance to see it.
No, I haven't seen it, but my wife has.
It's been described to me.
I don't think, from what I've been told, they could quite get away with that, but they should certainly have taken some of that ground and held it at all costs.
I gave up on them and would not watch the convention when it was clear what they were doing.
And I believe, from what I'm told by people in the Kerry campaign, that belatedly they realized they have more.
Well, you know, it's getting a little late to... It is too late now.
William Blake, you've chosen a painting of Blake to use on the stories and poems for extremely intelligent children.
I just love that title, by the way.
It is a somewhat aggressive title.
I can ascribe it, however, to my good friend and yours.
Indeed, I regard him as my adopted son, our agent Glenn Hartley, who is very good.
I'm good on titles, but Glenn came up with that one.
Did he really?
I said, I'm going to call it stories and poems for children of all ages.
He said, Harold, he said, let's say for extremely intelligent children.
And why is that an important distinction, do you think, to make?
Well, because I think an extremely intelligent child lay ill to fashion long enough to read the Harry Potter garbage, but
It gives that child a chance to, especially with some adults who really appreciate what it is, to read the Alice books.
I mean, I don't have to go on.
It's too obvious.
But you also make the distinction that you don't make the distinction between, quote, children's literature and... No, no, no.
I'm going to say children of all ages.
Children of all ages.
Clearly, clearly, there is something in our response to imaginative literature.
which has something to do with the child who's always alive in us still.
But why is Blake so appropriate?
Blake is one of my all-time favorites, I have to say.
Well, the poets I started with and first in love with were... So this is Clark Crane, Wallace Stevens, William Blake, Percy Bysshe Shelley.
and that Blake has never left me.
I wrote two books about it and he haunts me all the time.
But of course Blake made a very wise distinction between what he called organized innocence and ignorance and
That, I think, is extremely imaginative.
There's a pretty interesting reader.
There's a person who taught himself languages so he could... Oh, yes, no, Blake was.
I mean, none of us, William Blake, Blake was an astonishing and amazing phenomenon.
Was he tortured, in your view?
I think it was.
Was he tortured?
Oh, yes.
Yes, he was tormented by...
In the end, I think, though he dies at 70, one believes the account given by his disciples that he was joyous on his death, sang his own songs.
And, of course, he also had that great gift.
He was also the visual artist.
So we see this.
I chose this because...
It seemed to me to do what I wanted it to do.
Just as I said, I've been using Michelangelo's for a long time now, so hence the cover part of a series of the Where Shall Wisdom Be Found.
And I usually go to the Sistine Chapel for them.
I've realized already that with this Jesus and Yahweh book, I cannot use Michelangelo.
Indeed, I've already, in a sense, used the Michelangelo I would have used in the cover for the book called Genius.
With Adam and the Finger of God and so on.
I think that will have to be an abstract cover.
I was talking with Helen Vendler a couple of weeks ago.
Someone who is very dear to me, but I don't think I've actually seen him.
Helen, who I've known since she was a graduate student at Harvard, and I was the young instructor here, so I guess I've known Helen now.
It's got to be almost half a century.
She's wonderful.
But I have not actually seen her for four or five years.
We occasionally exchange a phone call or a note.
I gather she's going strong.
She is.
She's still actively teaching full-time at Harvard, as I am at Yale.
And the subject of canonization came up, of course, and the formulation, the acceptance of a canon.
And it is her view that I said, well, how does a work become canonical?
And she ascribes this to other writers.
Well, that is my own view, as you know.
And she said that's also Harold's view.
Yes.
Canonization takes place because a great writer knows what cannot be avoided and what he must come to some kind of terms with.
But they're always, I think, ambivalent terms.
And yes, it is in a deep...
In a deep sense, Keith is chosen by Tennyson and the Pre-Raphaelites.
Shelley is chosen by Browning, by Swinburne, by William Butler Yeats, by an entire tradition including Thomas Hardy.
But my point is... He's not just Hardy's favorite poet.
He was an obsession with Hardy.
My point, then, is when people attack you for what you wrote in the Western canon, it's not as if you pulled these things out of it.
No, I made it very clear.
You know, it's very interesting.
One doesn't get many reviews of an anthology, even one with as much prose in it by oneself as poems.
And I won't read reviews anymore anyway, whether they're favorable or unfavorable.
I just don't care.
It's just that I haven't got time.
I know that there's no point.
It's like somebody trying to get me to read a review of my teaching.
I can only shrug and say, I'm 74 years old.
I teach the way I teach.
And as far as reviewers are concerned,
I'm 74 years old, and I write the way I write.
That's that.
And I judge things the way I judge them.
But I would have thought... I would be wrong.
There's a Marxist critic who shall be nameless.
I didn't read his review, but Glenn told me about it.
Who reviewed a university Marxist critic, who reviewed the best poems, the Virginia Quarterly Review.
And he objected to it, saying that Bloom just prints the old chestnuts, the old chestnuts, Milton's listeners, you know, and his intimations owed, and as much Paradise Lost, and as much Whitman, the old chestnuts.
And then he said, and he continues his endless war against black and women poets, which really made me burst out loud.
The endless war.
against black and women poets.
And Alice Walker is suffering, I guess, because of the poetry of the great Alice Walker, or the poetry of that great prophet Tessa, the inspired Adrienne Rich, who proclaims to the world that only lesbianism can save a woman's autonomy.
You know, there is a purpose to talking in this direction, because
You see this NEA report that came out a couple of weeks ago.
Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
I am a consultant on their Shakespeare project.
Dana had me send this.
I responded to it by telephone with the Los Angeles Times, which printed up my response.
You can find it.
I'll find it.
Yeah, which I said, no, I thought this was wrong.
There had always been readers and non-readers.
It went right through human history and national history.
That hasn't changed very much.
I did say that fear was one profound difference simply cannot be helped because you cannot take the computer out of the house or out of the library or out of the classroom.
I teach only undergraduates now.
I don't want to teach graduate students anymore.
It's been that way for the last couple of years.
I feel that at my age and with my views, I am irrelevant for them, and I should not put my energies into that.
Nor do I think I can do them any good.
So I teach undergraduates, and very good undergraduates indeed.
They're at least as good as they've ever been here.
Well, that's excellent.
But I do remark in this, you know, these remarks in the Los Angeles Times, there is a difference that 25 years ago, they would arrive at Yale having read a great deal more than they have read now.
And that clearly has to do with television,
to some extent, motion pictures, and above all else, the computer.
That is to say, we are in the age of the screen.
We are in the age of interest, almost undifferentiated information.
And that means, as I say in this, that I find a kind of dilemma in teaching Shakespeare, because as I teach Shakespeare, as I want people to learn to read and appreciate Shakespeare, you must have choice.
You must have read.
enough of the Canterbury Tales to see that without Chaucer, I won't say no Shakespeare, but certainly not the Shakespeare who developed.
So you can't any longer, even with a very good junior or senior,
take certain things for granted that you could take for granted um 25 years ago you know you think when the great russian novels were written i don't think 80 percent of the russian population was literate you know no i think i think that is quite true but of course
It all depends what you mean by literate.
Technically speaking, since he actually got a Yale BA, I'm very suspicious of that.
And to my horror, Yale gave him an honorary degree the other year or so when he was president.
George W. Bush is semi-literate at best.
At best.
You know, when he was doing that thing on 9-11, it was my pet goat.
My feeling is he was in over his head.
That's why he was so silent.
The man is programmed.
I suppose a committee of Cheney, Rummy, Condi.
Condi, yeah.
Who's very close to him and to Mrs. Bush.
And Karl Rove, who was essentially the genius of this administration, I suppose that they have him well programmed and they always tell him what to say and what to do.
Well, but that is the sort of thing.
that Kerry and Edwards should have said from the platform.
And if they don't start saying it, they can forget it.
They can kiss it off.
It's all over.
You know, I've asked Bill Clinton this, I've not met him and I don't expect to, but when he was leaving office three and a half or so years ago, he was asked, what one piece of advice would you give George W. Bush?
It was very interesting.
He said, I would advise him, I would urge him to read David Herbert Donald's biography of Abraham Lincoln.
And I wonder what he meant by that.
I'd love to know why that would be the one piece of advice.
Number one, have him read a book, and he would have him read that book.
I think I would, myself, never being an ex-president, nevertheless, would say this, and I wouldn't recommend that George W. Bush read anything, because by his own boast, some years back, he has never in his life actually finished the book, even at Yale.
Yeah.
And I think he's not Kimball at all anymore.
I don't regard Clinton as a great intellectual judge of things.
I would say that perhaps the best thing a president can read is Gore Vidal's best book, which is his...
Yeah, interesting.
Not more about Abraham Lincoln.
Interesting.
I don't want to take up too much of your time, but I do have a couple more questions.
No, no, no, no, no.
We are well within time.
You and my dear friends, Nick.
I just so value your insight, and believe me, this will have a central point.
place in this book that I'm working on.
Let's go on.
When I get tired, I'll tell you.
Okay.
You repeatedly mentioned that Virginia Woolf and her musings about the common reader.
She takes that great phrase, as she says, from Johnson himself.
Hello?
It's Johnson's phrase, as you know.
It's Johnson's phrase?
Yes.
And then you also would share... By the judgment of the common reader, he says, all questions of value and endurance finally will be settled down.
That's not the exact wording, but it's something close to that.
She picks that up and uses the title for her two series of rather excellent essays.
But the Bloom Principles of Reading...
basically do derive from Johnson, it seems to me.
I would say, I love when you say you have to free yourself of Kent.
One endless injunction of the great doctor was, clear yourself of Kent.
And it's because one keeps shouting that.
Indeed, my friend Hollander, to bring him in again, his critique of me, he says, Harold, there is no point ranting against Kant, but I can't help it.
So is it hard when you sit down to read, to kind of clear yourself, to prepare yourself for the task at hand?
It depends what one is reading these days.
If I'm not reading, you know,
scholarship or reactions to the New Testament.
I find myself reading and rereading the Greek New Testament.
What profound puzzlement I must admit.
I find it a
Extremely fascinating piece of work.
Do you think I should talk with John Hollander?
That might be pretty fascinating.
Yeah, Uncle Hollander is one of the best literary minds alive.
That would be kind of fun.
He may by now also be a client, or at least partly a client of Glenn's.
He is a man of formidable eloquence.
a lens learning.
He is far more learning in an organized way than I am.
An extraordinarily feckled and gifted mind in every way.
In one of your books, and of course I'm having all of them here, it's hard to remember which ones I'm drawing this from, but you say that our national epics are Moby Dick and Leaves of Grass.
I don't know where I said it, but I think that's absolutely true, if someone were to say to me.
Without the two great American books, I would, well, in terms of eminence, I would say Leaves of Grass, and I would say if it has any rival, it has to be Moby Dick.
And you would call them our epics?
Leaves of Grass, well, Song of Myself, the heart of the first Leaves of Grass, what eventually gets to be called Song of Myself,
is in a way the national epic, but Leaves of Grass as a composite is certainly the national epic.
A kind of dark anti-epic, as it were.
Moby Dick.
Hi, Gene.
Okay.
Hello, dear.
I won't keep you too much.
Again, I have the books, but I do... You were talking about that Leaves of Grass and Moby Dick.
Exactly.
There's the epics.
I can't really think of a third one.
I mean, there are eminent and powerful books by Americans.
Huckleberry Finn is not epic, of course.
No single work by Bothone or James could be called epical.
Emerson really has to be read in the complete uncut journals.
That's his great work.
And it's hard to match that.
You anoint him the American Goethe, too, which I find very interesting.
Oh, yes, yes.
I think he is the national sage.
No sin.
You know what, Harold, I'm going to let you go because this must get firing.
Well, it's a great pleasure.
We're actually at the point we had agreed on anyway.
We've done 45 minutes.
But I will look forward to reading your book, my dear.
Thank you.
And thank you so much for everything.
Nick, prosper, please.
Thank you, sir.
You too.
Take good care of your health.
Thank you, sir.
Bye-bye.